\input texinfo
@c -*- texinfo -*-
@setfilename guix-mate.texi
@settitle Guix MATE User Guide
@documentencoding UTF-8

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2025 Urutaú Limited.
@c GFDL is common for GNU projects
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Guix MATE Desktop Environment Extensions
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@menu
* Index:: Complete document index.
* Disclaimer of Warranty:: Disclaimer of this guide.
* Introduction:: A brief introductory page for users reading this material.
* Project Goals:: Know the project goals, what this channel is limited to.
* Packages:: A list and description of some packages offered by us.
* Services:: A list of Gnu Guix services.
* Thanks:: Thanks.
@end menu

@node Disclaimer of Warranty
@chapter Disclaimer of Warranty

EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER
PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM “AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This document exists to offer a Guix-like documentation for this particular
channel. It's heavily inspired on the @url{https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/, Original GNU Guix Manual}
but does not aim to copy or replace it, instead, this manual tries to be a
starting point for users migrating from both 100% Free and maybe not-so-free
Gnu/Linux distributions while explaining what's inside this repository, how to
replace the software you are used to in other distributions like Trisquel
and how to contribute to this repository.

@section Guix MATE, what is and what isn't.

Guix MATE is not a distribution, nor a re-spin or derivative of GNU Guix. It's
a supplementary channel that addresses the missing bits and pieces of the MATE
desktop environment within the GNU Guix ecosystem. This channel strives to
provide a nice MATE desktop experience without making you leave the comfort
of your Guix installation.

@section Why this channel exists

Inspiration for this channel began from the author moving across Gnu/Linux
distributions. At the time I started using GNU/Linux the popular GNOME 2
desktop was already long gone. But an effort called @var{Ubuntu MATE} was
being born someplace in the Internet, this distribution, alongside
@var{Linux Mint} were (and maybe still are) the MATE Desktop giants, with a
huge commitment to providing a polished, easy-to-use, revived GNOME 2 desktop
experience. While I haven't been long enough in the GNU lands, the idea of a
traditional desktop catched my attention since, at that time, I had a weak
computer that couldn't handle the resource hungry GNOME 3.X of those ages.
After taking more steps towards software freedom I noticed not so many
distributions did the same for the MATE Desktop, sure, it was available for
the mainstream Gnu/Linux distributions everyone knows, but their efforts were
clearly pointed towards other desktops, with missing software like the
@code{mate-menu} or the @code{dconf} settings editor that Linux Mint created
under the name @code{mintdesktop} which Ubuntu MATE later 
ported as @code{mate-tweak} were missing from some major distributions.

Then I came across Trisquel GNU/Linux-Libre which was my mainline distribution
for quite some time, and, while it's timing left me much to desire when it
came to software updates, it had @var{freedom} all over it, including a very
clean MATE Desktop implementation. When I moved on to Gnu Guix, I was glad that
the installer had a @code{MATE} option but I was sad to see that there were
many bits missing from this wonderful desktop. This is, of course, not
anyone's fault or a rant directed to the Guix maintainers, the community is
small and everyone is doing their best to keep up their computing tasks and
maintaining the distribution. While I was unfamiliar with the email patches
process for contribution, I had the luck of starting just a few weeks after
the project had migrated to Codeberg.

So, this channel, Guix MATE, is my solution to this problem I have. It's the
synthesis of these awesome experiences I had with free and not-so-free
distributions while trying to contribute back something to the organization
that introduced me to what the word @var{freedom} really meant. In this channel
I want to create a space for MATE enthusiasts to enjoy a 100% libre, declarative
and reproducible desktop environment, extending what Guix already offers so
other Trisquel GNU/Linux-libre users can jump with less friction in the
future.

@node Project Goals
@chapter Project Goals

@node Packages
@chapter Packages

This chapter provides a detailed overview of the packages available in this
particular channel. All packages in this channel are guaranteed to be 100%
free-as-in-freedom software.

@section Core MATE Packages

This channel provides some missing foundational packages from the MATE Desktop
environment such as:

@enumerate
@item @code{caja-python}: Python bindings to extend the Caja file manager.
@end enumerate

@section Ubuntu MATE Packages

We also provide some packages directly from Ubuntu MATE. Some of these have been
abandoned since 2021-2023. I personally would like to believe it's because
these are @var{feature-complete} rather than abandonware.

For these particular cases if, after some time, no more movement is seen on
these packages, a fork will be made and maintained using missing merge requests
or patches to ensure fellow geeks get a comfy desktop experience:

@enumerate
@item @code{brisk-menu}: Modern MATE menu written in C. Forked from an abandoned repo here in Codeberg.
@item @code{mate-menu}: Port of @code{mintmenu} with Mint-specific code replaced.
@item @code{mate-tweak}: Port of @code{mintdesktop} with Mint-specific code replaced.
@item @code{mate-dock-applet}: Modern dock-like window list for MATE Desktop
@end enumerate

@section Linux Mint MATE Packages

@section Trisquel Gnu/Linux-Libre Packages

@section Non-MATE but related packages

@node Services
@chapter Services

@node Thanks
@chapter Thanks

@bye
